---
title: "Dialing in my workflow: Markdown"
author: chipoglesby
comments: true
date: "2022-03-25"
layout: post
slug: markdown-is-awesome
excerpt: There are so many advantages of Markdown I'm surprised everyone isn't using it.
published: true
categories:
- sidenote
---

Part of what I've been doing more of lately is writing documentation for 
various projects.
It's interesting all of the various different formats that files can be stored
in. The most common are
probably word document files (Google & Microsoft), XLS (Microsoft Excel & 
Google Sheets) and
PDF files. 

For example, writing tech specs for clients usually involves writing them in Google Sheets or 
Microsoft Word files, but the formatting for these are usually terrible. 

But lately I've started using Markdown for just about everything. Even though
there are many flavors of markdown, I'm trying to stick to the 
[Github Flavored Markdown](https://github.github.com/gfm/).

I really like taking notes and writing documentation in Markdown because it can
easily be created and written in any text editor or IDE. There's no special
software that requires vendor lock-in like Google or Microsoft.

Even the blog that I'm writing in right now supports writing posts in Markdown 
and rendering them with Jekyll.

If you're a windows or Mac user there's also plenty of apps like Inkdrop 
that make note-taking, etc super simple on these platforms.

## So Why Do You Prefer Markdown?

I like Markdown because of the simplicity. For example, using
[Github Flavored Markdown](https://github.github.com/gfm/), you can open
Notepad and just start writing. You don't have to worry about the graphic
display of text, you can just focus on writing.

Markdown isn't the only format out there, but it's what's most commonly
accepted for version control tools like BitBucket, Gitlab and Github. I'm
sure that there are others that can do things differently, but for right now, 
this is okay.

Markdown is also easy to use. Publishing documentation to Github pages is very 
straightforward because Github handles all of the heavy-lifting for you. If you
need to save your Markdown files as PDF, there are also plenty of tools for
that.

Using free tools like VSCode makes working with Markdown even easier to use.
I personally prefer writing in plain-text but there are extensions for VSCode
that let you preview what your Markdown will look like, if that's your thing.

Since Markdown files are plain-text with markup in them, it's great if you're
using version control software. The plain text files also make them more 
human and machine readable.

When I'm writing documentation, Markdown lets you easily enter codeblocks 
with just a little formmating.

Markdown doesn't replace everything though. There are still specific needs
for things like Spreadsheets and Word Documents, but you always want to be
careful to choose the right tool for the job.
